Good morning.
Welcome to the
Java Virtual Machine Exposed.
Don't panic.
We didn't bring trench coats.
For those of you who did come here
out of voyeuristic tendencies,
you can leave now.
What this talk is really for are for
developers who want to look under the
hood at the Java VM engine on Tiger,
and who want to kick the tires of the
Java VM on the new Intel-based Macs.
So, what you're going to learn
about Mac OS X on Java,
Java on Mac OS X in this talk,
is the here, the now,
and a preliminary look at the race ahead.
The here is Tiger,
what we delivered six weeks ago,
namely J2SE 5.0.
That's Java 1.5, for those of you on
the old naming scheme.
With the C1 compiler,
that's the same compiler
we've shipped in the past,
with earlier versions of Mac OS X.
And then, let's see,
Mikey McDougall's gonna come
up and fill you in on that.
And then Victor Hernandez is
going to come up and talk about
what we just did right now,
namely the Tiger on Intel Macs,
how we have older versions of Java 1.4.2,
and then the C1 compiler on Java 1.5,
and also he's gonna introduce
the new C2 compiler that we're
shipping with the developer kit
on the new Intel-based Macs.
Actually, it's not on the developer DVD,
but it's gonna be a separate download,
just like 1.5 was with Tiger.
And then I'm gonna come back,
my name's Roger Hoover, after that,
and give you some preliminary numbers
on where we are on the development
platform with the Intel box.
So, Mikey?
Thanks, Roger.
So the Java Virtual Machine in Tiger
It's really sort of cool to
be able to talk about this
because it's a really good VM.
Tiger comes,
and this is sort of probably the
third time you've heard this,
but it comes with 1.4.2 and
1.3.1 sort of installed.
Every Mac's got them.
And now some of your
customers have got J2SE 5.0.
This came out six weeks ago,
same time that Tiger came out.
And it's available as
a software download.
It's so, I mean,
it turned out really well.
It's going to be a software update soon.
So, one of the things that people
ask a lot about is like,
where are we going with Java?
So, what's our support story?
We're moving forward, really are.
The J2SE 5.0 is really the
focus of our efforts now.
and the good news there is that
it's a really good release,
and that all your 1.4 stuff
still runs in J2SE 5.0.
If you have any backwards compatibility
bugs that you're encountering,
let us know.
Let us know right now,
because this is where we're going.
And really, really,
Java 1.3.1 is going away.
So this is some stuff that Sun said
about their release of J2SE 5.0.
Your application, it already works.
The platform was subjected
to a lot of testing,
and Sun was really
proud of their release,
and rightly so.
They did a great job.
And I'm here to tell you that
it's a really good release.
If you're not on J2SE 5.0,
you should download it.
You should give it a try,
because it's really solid.
So what's new?
This really is sort of the biggest delta
for a Java release that has happened in
the history of Delta's Java releases.
There's language changes that
I'm gonna go into briefly.
There's library and runtime changes.
How many folks are running J2SE 5.0?
I mean,
how much of this is review material for?
Okay, good.
So I won't burn through this,
but I'll go through
this relatively quickly.
So language features.
So now we get auto boxing.
So as a programmer,
you can go back and forth between
the base type int and the object
integer sort of interchangeably.
We have support for generics.
So this really lets you
provide more object-oriented,
more portable code and libraries.
Static import, very handy.
You get the enhanced for loop for,
just makes iterators a
little bit cleaner looking.
You get var args, which are very nice.
And metadata,
metadata is really powerful.
I mean, originally when I saw
the whole Java doc thing,
I'm like, huh?
But it's turned out to be just huge,
and I think it's gonna get bigger.
So one thing you should know about
all these language enhancements
are it's all syntactic.
It's all up in Java C.
It doesn't actually affect the
bytecodes that get spit out.
And they all really do things that make
it so that you can write good code,
portable code.
And by and large,
none of these changes sort of affect
how your application will perform.
With one exception that I'm
going to talk about briefly.
This is autoboxing.
Autoboxing is a little odd in that
autoboxing does create objects for you.
And so while this is generally
good because you're going to have
to create the objects anyway,
you can get yourself into
a little bit of trouble.
So here's an example for those
of you who took calculus in
maybe high school or college.
If you remember Taylor series
and things like that,
this is something that's going
to calculate a quarter of pi
by successive approximations,
a little loop.
And it runs through and builds it
up by running through this loop
again and again and again and again.
And, you know,
if you're straining your brain
to remember Taylor polynomials,
you might make...
A slightly different version.
Now, the only difference
between these two versions,
I don't know if you can see it,
The first example is
using a double capital D,
and the second example is
using a double lowercase d.
If you push this through into what that
means once auto-boxing is turned on,
you can see that you've got a
fair amount of extra cruft there.
So, just be aware that this can happen.
So there's sort of a good news,
bad news kind of thing.
The bad news is it's like,
takes two and a half,
2.7 times longer to run.
The good news is,
that only took two and a half,
2.7 times longer to run.
So, the good news is,
the compilers are really good.
So, just be aware that this can happen.
So there's sort of a good news,
bad news kind of thing.
The bad news is it's like,
takes two and a half,
2.7 times longer to run.
The good news is,
that only took two and a half,
2.7 times longer to run.
So, the good news is,
the compilers are really good.
We got a real high precision
time available now.
We got a super fast string builder.
It's not thread safe,
but it allows us to do sort
of what would be older,
slower string operations much faster.
The string plus operator
now goes much faster.
And if you were in the
session before this,
you probably heard about some of the
graphics improvements that are available.
So you also get some
graphics pipelining stuff.
So I want to talk about
the virtual machine that is
shipping right now in Tiger.
This is the C1 compiler,
something that's called
the client compiler.
It's a just-in-time compiler,
so you're running along, doing bytecodes,
bytecodes, bytecodes, and it says, "Oh,
this is a hot method.
"I'm gonna take it down and crank it
right onto the machine." There's a couple
things that you need to know about this.
One is that it will go to
whatever machine it's on.
If it's on a G5, it'll go to a G5.
If it's on a G4, it'll go to a G4.
So it really uses the best
instructions that it has available
to it to do any particular job.
The internal representation of
classes are basically static.
They don't change.
And so one of the other things we've
managed to do to boost startup time
is to sort of freeze dry classes,
and then share those between
various instances of JVMs.
And what you may not know is
you have a variety of garbage
collector options available to you.
So let's talk about the
compiler itself first.
So the whole idea behind a compiler
is that you want to run fast.
And you also don't want to spend
a whole lot of time compiling.
So we look at the hot methods,
and those are the methods
that we recompile.
Now, generally, just having a JIT,
a Just-In-Time Compiler,
will make your stuff run 10 times faster.
But there's a sort of balance that
needs to be struck between compilation
time and time that you actually
spend doing work with the processors.
So, we'll talk later about sort
of more classic compilers,
stuff you'd see in C and C++.
These you have to crank pretty hard
to get absolutely optimal code out of,
and optimal register allocation.
So the C1 compiler actually provides
a good balance between that.
It compiles quickly and still
produces quite good code.
The C1 compiler is the default compiler.
It's got a couple things in it that
are sort of interesting to know about.
The first thing took me a
while to understand this
on-stack replacement thing.
So, you can imagine that you have
a method that has a loop in it,
and you're going to
loop around that loop,
you know, 50,000 times.
Now, it'd be kind of a drag if you had
to be interpreted 50,000 times
before you got up out of that loop,
and then you could compile it.
So, the C1 compiler actually does,
it compiles it in place.
It says, oh,
you've been in this function a long time.
Maybe I should compile it.
And then so, it compiles it,
and it sort of inserts you
into the function on the stack,
you know, sort of live.
And that's really quite powerful.
The other thing that it does is the
VM knows sort of instantaneously what
classes have and haven't been loaded.
So,
even if you have two classes with virtual
methods that might have the same name,
if only one of them has ever shown up,
it's able to know.
Oh, I can treat that as final.
I can inline that.
I can push that back in and up and
optimize out all the call cost.
The other kind of cool thing
that the C1 compiler does is,
along with all this
compilation and optimization,
there's deoptimization.
So, for instance,
if you're in this function
I was talking about before,
you're cranking around
the loop 50,000 times,
and you put a breakpoint on it,
for instance.
The hotspot VM realizes, oh,
he wants to debug.
And what it'll do is,
it kind of unfolds all
of that compiled code,
takes you back into the
bytecodes at the right spot.
You know, sticks your, you know,
lets the debugger know, oh,
this is the bytecode that you're on.
And then you just kind of
keep going in real time.
So that, I was really,
sort of blew my mind the
first time I saw that.
It's really good.
So, also in the C2 compiler,
they've got some other support for, just,
basically if you do
object-oriented programming,
you subclass things.
These are optimizations to make
it so that you can just write
good object-oriented code and
still expect it to go fast.
And lastly, the code generation in the C1
compiler is optimized for PowerPC.
So, you get Altevec instructions,
you get 64-bit instructions for longs,
floats, doubles.
Let's go to this whole faster math thing.
You may have seen this
slide earlier today.
On a G5,
this thing turns into just a pair of
loads off the stack into registers.
On a G4, of course,
you haven't got 64-bit registers,
so dealing with longs takes
a few more operations.
In the context of this slide,
this is a really nice,
clean Java function.
This guy is almost certainly
going to get inlined.
So on the G5,
you're not even going to pay the
branch through the link register,
generally speaking.
Class data showing,
so we're kind of proud of this,
'cause it's cool.
What you do is, as I said before,
you sort of freeze dry that
internal representation of a class,
store it off on disk,
and then this lets you very
quickly invoke that class.
There's ways to control this if you
want to sort of tightly control and
profile your code and understand things.
They're listed up here.
We originally came up with it at Apple,
and we gave that back to Sun,
and Sun's like, wow, this is a cool idea.
And they've pushed it out
through all the VMs now.
So you'll be seeing this
in J2SE 5.0 everywhere.
Garbage collection.
So one of the great things about
Java is you haven't got to do
your own memory management.
There are three garbage collectors that
you have available to you right now.
and they meet different needs.
The default garbage collector is the
one that works with class data sharing.
It's got a good mix of sort of time
spent paused to do garbage collection,
versus over the length of your program,
the amount of time spent
garbage collecting.
There's another one available,
Concurrent Mark and Sweep.
This is sort of optimized so that
over the life of your program,
a long running program,
you will spend as little time as possible
actually doing the garbage collection.
But you might have slightly longer pauses
while it does that very efficiently.
And then lastly,
we've got another one that
has sort of briefer pauses,
so it's sort of more real time.
But over the life of your program,
you're going to see longer,
more time actually spent
doing the garbage collection.
The take home point from this
whole slide is that you have
choices available to you.
Garbage collection is kind of
really tricky to get in your
head exactly how it performs.
And we don't even suggest that you try.
What we really suggest that
you try is if you have sort
of performance critical stuff,
try each of these garbage collectors,
see which one matches
your needs the best,
and then use that one.
And you shouldn't go to any
Java sessions this week and not
have us tell you about Shark,
because Shark is so damn cool.
It's a really good performance tool.
You get it for free with
your development package.
I've just seen people get huge
wins just doing some really
straightforward optimizations.
So, get Shark, run Shark,
identify your execution bottlenecks.
I mean, it's really great.
So, knowing that there's a compiler
under there actually has
implications for your code.
I mean, it's really great.
So knowing that there's a
compiler under there actually
has implications for your code.
two different things,
but we're unable to hoist a method up
and inline it if it's synchronized,
if it's very very heavy, if it's large,
and also if you have
an exception handler,
that also will not be inlined.
and you know, it's the 21st century,
so here's some sort of general
programming tips knowing that you're
working with the hotspot compiler.
Exceptions.
Exceptions are objects,
and they're not like little
featherweight objects,
they're heavy objects.
They got a whole stack frame in them.
So use them for error handling.
Don't use them for control flow.
Don't use them to like terminate the
end of your loop or something like that.
It's just...
Very odd to see that.
The other thing,
and this is sort of more important,
is don't use object pools.
The whole power of Java in many
ways is that you don't have to
worry about object management.
Object creation, object deletion,
it's very different from Cocoa that way.
And we keep making the handling of
objects faster and faster and faster.
So all of these things are going on.
Garbage collection these days is very,
very fast.
New has been in line,
new gets in lined along
with everything else.
And so it's really fast.
We get lock-free
allocation on each thread.
So stay away from these object pools.
So Java, Tiger, and you, J2SE,
5.0, it's ready, it's there.
And generally speaking,
when you're tuning for Java,
Don't optimize first.
Write your code as clean as you can.
Let us do the heavy
lifting with the compiler,
and then only afterwards
take it to something like
Shark and do your optimization.
And with that,
I'd like to bring up Victor to
talk about what's new on Intel.
Don't optimize first.
Write your code as clean as you can.
Let us do the heavy
lifting with the compiler,
and then only afterwards
take it to something like
Shark and do your optimization.
And with that,
I'd like to bring up Victor to
talk about what's new on Intel.
So, this is what the picture looks
like for JVM support in Tiger.
We support 1.3.1, 1.4.2, and 5.0.
Basically, all of the support that
Mikey just described.
How does this change on the
Intel-based Macintosh computers?
Well, there's two main changes.
The first thing you'll see
is that 1.3.1 is gone away.
We've told you for a while
that it was going away.
Now it's gone.
But we are actually providing
something new in replacement,
which is something you've
been asking for for a while,
and that's the server compiler.
It's available to you under Java 1.5
on the Intel-based Macintosh computers.
When you sit down at one
of these Intel-based Macs,
what kind of Java support can you expect?
You can expect basically
equivalent support for 1.4 and 5.0,
as you found right now in Tiger.
It is really robust,
and we're really proud of the
implementation that we have going.
I've been working with developers all
week on basically trying out their
application on the Intel-based Mac,
and it's been really, really successful.
Not only are they running
on Intel for the first time,
but they're also sometimes going
from 1.4 to 1.5 for the first time,
and it's going really, really smoothly.
As Mikey mentioned before,
5.0 is really the way to go,
and it also applies on
the Intel-based machines.
Your Java application
should continue to work.
There are some issues with having
to upgrade to universal binaries
for your native libraries,
but one of the key things also
is that the developer tools like
Xcode will continue to work there.
Also, a lot of the open-source things
like Eclipse are basically one
recompiler away from working,
and will be available for
download for the systems very,
very soon.
Okay, so I'm here to mainly talk about
the one thing that we're adding,
which is the C2 compiler.
Something that we've heard a lot from
developers that they're interested
in using when deploying on Mac OS X.
The main difference between C1 and C2
is the fact that C2 uses more advanced
compilation techniques to generate
faster code for your Java methods.
It plugs into Hotspot just like C1,
and uses a lot of the same
dynamic features as C1,
including the ones mentioned
here that Mikey described.
Things like on-stack replacement,
and the ability to dynamically
de-optimize a compiled
method back into interpreter,
either for implementation
of deep inlining,
aggressive inlining,
or for debugging purposes.
All you have to do to get access
to the C2 compiler is to invoke
Java with the minus server flag.
I'm actually kind of curious,
how many people here on Mac OS X,
or on any Java platform
they did deploy on,
use the minus server flag?
So you wanted to change your application,
and it will just work like that.
We've always supported the
minus server flag back in
previous versions of Mac OS X.
It doesn't get you a different
just-in-time compiler.
It basically gets you a
few different parameters.
But now,
on the Intel-based Macintosh computers,
it's actually going to get
you a different JIT compiler,
a completely different set of
performance characteristics.
We do, in the Apple Developer Kit,
we don't currently support
passing the minus server flag in
application bundles or in applets,
but that will be supported very soon.
All right,
so let's talk about the C2 compiler.
It does generate better
code than the C1 compiler.
One of the things that you've got to
keep in mind with the C2 compiler,
and your understanding of it,
is that all of the things that
Mikey described earlier about
how C1 generates optimized code,
think of that as a
subset of what C2 does.
It simply does a better job.
To do a better job at compiling
your hot Java methods,
it unfortunately does take longer to do.
The general rule of thumb is that the
C2 compiler takes 10 times as long
to compile your Java method as C1.
This can actually cause a visible
pause in your application,
similar to a visible pause you
might see from garbage collection.
So when is it actually useful
for you to use a C2 compiler?
It's mainly when you have a long-running
application that can withstand those
possibly longer compilation pauses.
And also, if you have some hot methods,
you can use some methods that
are very compute-intensive,
so that the amount of time spent in them,
algorithmically,
is important enough to get the
best code you can possibly.
The other thing to keep in mind
is that the compiler scales very
well on multi-processor systems,
meaning that the pause is
not so visible when you're
running on various processors.
So let's actually go into detail
on what we're talking about in
this compilation pause time.
and how that can affect your
application's performance.
So let's say this application,
basically the horizontal axis,
is the amount of time it
takes to run this app.
If you run it with the interpreter,
it takes the green amount of time.
As you can see with C1 and C2,
they both take a less amount of time.
Why does C1 take more time
than C2 in this example?
Well, as you can see,
even though C1 takes less time
to compile the three methods,
the generated code is
substantially slower than C2,
and it actually takes a lot longer
to actually execute those methods.
So in this case, C2 is faster than C1.
Remember, that is not always true.
Here's a similar application
with three methods.
And in this case,
C2 is taking so long to compile
these methods that it actually
takes longer than C1 would
take to even just execute them.
And the amount of time taken overall
turns out to be faster for C1.
This can be seen in a lot
of GUI applications when
running with the C2 compiler.
And you really just have to
measure your application to find
out which of these two scenarios
your application falls under.
All right, so how does C2 generate
better code than C1?
Well, one of the things that it's mainly
doing is it's applying a lot more
classic compiler optimizations
to your Java method than C1 is.
That's where it's spending all
of the extra time and possibly
using more memory to do so.
Here's a whole list of
optimizations that C2 does,
some of which are done by C1,
but mainly it's things that only C2 does.
Instead of describing them here
with just a few bullet points,
it's much better to illustrate them,
so let's actually go through
each of these in succession.
First of all,
we've got strength reduction.
The thing to keep in mind is
that an optimizing compiler
optimizes your code in two ways.
One, it either reduces the amount
of operations being done,
or chooses an operation
that's less costly.
Or, it moves your code around in such
a way that it makes some other
optimization able to reduce the number
of operations that are required.
In this case, dividing by two is more
expensive than shifting by one,
and C2 is able to identify
such a situation and replace
it with a cheaper operation.
Here's another one.
Here's one where it actually just
moves your code around to provide
another optimization to do its job.
Basically,
you can move values and variables
around and simplify the expression
for something like constant folding.
Constant folding is powerful
because you got rid of two,
you reduced from one add
operation to just simply,
from two add operations to just one,
because the compiler knows what
the value of the constants are
since it moved them around.
And even though your code might not have
looked like this in the first place,
it's able to do this for you.
Another optimization is
constant propagation.
Here, if you know the value of
a particular variable,
you can cascade that value
down into later operations and
simplify expressions later on.
There's also common
sub-expression elimination.
It's not just a value,
but it's actually an expression that
you can propagate down and simplify it.
Here, the key thing is that you're doing
the plus operation only once,
and reusing the value.
Loop unrolling.
This is a pretty interesting one.
Loops can be basically,
if you know that this loop, for example,
is only being executed
four times exactly,
you may as well just
execute four times in a row.
It looks like this is doing
the same amount of work,
but there's two things
that are being gained here.
One is the fact that if
you still do the for loop,
there is actually a minor overhead
to checking to see if we've
gotten to the end of the loop,
and the code on the right-hand
side doesn't have that problem.
The other thing also is that once you
move all of this code and flatten it out,
it actually enables a lot of
other optimizations to happen,
especially in the case where
you're able to inline foo,
which we'll get to in a second.
There's also loop invariant code motion.
This one is very, very powerful.
C1 is not able to do this.
If an expression is always
computed every single time
during the iteration of a loop,
you may as well just do
it once before the loop,
and then reuse the
value every single time.
In this case, X divided by Y,
an expensive operation,
divide is expensive,
although we do do the best job we can.
It's always the same every
time you go around the loop,
and you may as well just do it
once before you go into the loop.
There's also dead code elimination.
Clearly,
this expression can be simplified
to just the body of the true
branch in the if statement.
You might say, well,
my code never looks like this.
Why would you be doing this optimization?
Well, because of other optimizations,
like, for example,
knowing constants and expression values,
you can basically get into a
scenario where your code actually
does end up looking like this,
as far as the compiler is concerned,
and you didn't have to refactor your
code specifically for this one scenario.
Really, really powerful optimizations.
Class Iric Analysis.
Mikey mentioned this one earlier.
This is actually an optimization
that C1 is able to do as well.
And the key thing here is
that even though the answer
is declared to be virtual,
because you wanted your
code to be as easy to reuse
later on for other purposes,
and override that method,
if you actually haven't
overridden your method,
we can just treat the answer
as being a declared final,
and we know we can
dispatch directly there.
That gives us the opportunity
to reduce the overhead of
the virtual method lookup,
and it also lets us do the following.
If we know that that method is the
only destination for the virtual call,
we can inline it.
[Transcript missing]
All right, so you can say,
all of the specific optimizations,
my code never looks like that.
Well, the point I'm trying to make is
that your code does end up looking
like that once the compiler is
able to move all your code around.
Here's an example.
Basically, all we're doing is we're
calling foo with two values.
And you can reuse the foo
method in many different places
with many different values.
But in this specific case,
what's really powerful is that
once you know the value of n and m,
you can basically optimize
this thing like crazy.
Once you know n and m,
you know what x is.
Basically,
you can collapse the whole switch
statement because you know what x is.
At that point, then,
you also know what y is,
and you can do dead code
elimination on the if statement.
And at that point, then,
all you have is basically
that return value,
which obviously you can
simplify down to something.
So, this is something as simple as 42.
It's printing out 42.
This is a real-world example that C2
does genuinely simplify down to print 42.
C1 is not able to do this.
This is really, really powerful,
and this does extend to just
about any kind of algorithmic,
compute-intensive code you
might put into your hot methods.
So, as you can see,
when you're doing a lot
of things like this,
C2 will be able to generate
better code than C1.
What happened there?
Sorry, there's a delay here.
All right, well, now I'm having trouble.
Wow.
Yeah, it's compiling.
This is, you know,
one of those visual pauses.
Maybe I'm compiling.
Well, escape, and then press play.
Let's try that.
What else do you need to know about C2?
There is actually some more things you
need to know about C2 than just simply
how it's able to optimize your code.
One of the cool things
is that it has a really,
really great register allocator.
This is the sort of register
allocator that's common in
a lot of static compilers.
A full graph coloring allocator
where it's able to use as many
registers as it possibly can and limit
the amount of spills that happen.
It also uses a static single assignment
intermediate representation that's
pretty heavy duty compiler jargon.
What you need to know about
that intermediate representation
is the fact that it's able to,
it makes a lot of the optimizations
that we described earlier capable
of being done very easily.
You should also know that GCC4
is also using this style of
intermediate representation,
and that's also one of the ways that
it's able to do better optimizations.
Also, there's null check elimination
that C2 is able to do.
You might know that null
checks can be implemented very
easily using hardware support,
and so there might not be a
reason to get rid of null checks.
Well, in fact,
since a null check is able to do,
have as a side effect the
throwing of a Java exception,
it can actually minimize the ability
of other optimizations to happen,
because there's a lot of kind of control
flow that gets simplified once you
get rid of that possible side effect.
And so this is really powerful.
Just like C1,
it's able to dynamically determine
what the best instructions are on
the given process you're running.
For example,
choosing to use SSC2 instructions.
And it also has the ability to
knowledge of the Java memory model.
So if you're using a volatile variable,
it knows how to inline code
that does specifically that.
So, now that you know a lot about C2,
and that you know that C2 is basically a
superset of the optimizations done by C1,
the thing to keep in
mind is that therefore,
all the things that Mikey described
earlier as good practices for optimizing
your code in C1 also apply to C2.
Just that C2 simply does a better
job at optimizing your code.
So, just write your code as you would,
just object-oriented.
Let us do the optimizations,
and just keep your code clean.
But I want to reiterate, once again,
the tips for the 21st
century that Mikey described,
which are that exceptions
should be exceptional.
There really is no need to optimize ahead
of time by making your methods final.
And also,
that object pools are only really
needed in very specific scenarios.
And with that,
I want to invite Roger Hoover on
stage to tell you about how,
what kind of performance changes
we've seen in applications that
we've been running that will
also apply to your application.
Thank you, Victor.
Okay, how does this performance
change with the new JVM?
I'm gonna talk about how C1
and C2 compilers compare on
the new Intel-based Macs.
And I'm gonna talk about a couple,
three measurements, namely startup time,
how does that look,
and the memory footprint,
and then I'll run through
some benchmark numbers.
But first let me say,
these are really preliminary results.
We're running on a machine hardware
that's just a development system.
The real machines are gonna be different.
We just got this working like last week.
So we really haven't spent
any time performance tuning
on this implementation.
And in specific,
there are known things that we know
we have to fix performance-wise.
So even though it seems to
be working really stable,
and we're really happy about that,
things should improve and
the numbers will change.
And now I'm having this, there we go.
So C1 versus C2, just startup time.
Well, we kind of told you what the
goals were in the design of
these two different compilers,
and that really shows
up on this slide here.
You can see that for a simple
little program that doesn't
take much time at all,
C1 is faster than C2 on HelloAWT.
But a longer and more
involved GUI-type example,
C2 takes a lot longer,
62% slower at startup time.
So if your application
looks like Java 2D,
you're probably gonna
wanna just stay with C1.
Memory footprint,
there's a little bit of difference here.
And you can see that on
both of these examples,
C2 takes slightly more memory.
Now, on some benchmarks,
Simark is a benchmark that does
a bunch of math computation,
and you'd perhaps expect a more
crunching compiler might do better,
and this shows you.
Here we have the scores that Simark has,
so the taller the score, the better.
And you can see that
in all of these cases,
C2 is outperforming C1,
and if you look at the composite score,
it's 2.3 times faster, so big win by C2.
And on a well-known compiler benchmark,
we're just measuring the time here.
So the shorter bar is faster.
The C2 numbers are there.
C1 numbers are here.
And you'll notice that
C2 doesn't always win.
So some of this benchmark suite, C2 wins.
Some of the benchmark suite, C1 wins.
What does this say
about your application?
Well,
Just like we tried these benchmarks,
you're going to have to try your
applications and see just how
well they perform under each,
and pick the best solution
for your deployment.
So another benchmark,
business logic benchmark.
C2, a little bit faster than C1.
and Vellano Mark.
This is a chat room with
a server and a client,
lots of message sends.
C1, fairly big win for C1.
So again, measure your own applications.
Don't just assume that one compiler
is going to win over the other.
So, pretty exciting, we think.
We get faster performance
with C2 on many applications.
I know people who are in the server
space have been clamoring for this,
and we expect it to work well.
We want your feedback about all
of this stuff and other things.
So later this afternoon, 3:30,
please come to the feedback forum.
Tell us what you want,
what you think about Java.
If you want to give us praise,
please make sure you're there.
To contact, we have Alan Samuel,
who will be up here on stage
in a little bit for some Q&A.
And Francois Jouel,
who is the manager of the group,
he'll be here as well.